- Feature Name: RTH Defragmentation Memos
- Start Date: 2023-02-03
- MCIP PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mcips#0061](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/0061)
- Implementation PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin#3170](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/pull/3170)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This proposal introduces a new memo type to support [Recoverable Transaction History (RTH)](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/4). The new memo type will be used by clients to mark `TxOut`s created as part of account defragmentation. This can be used by client applications as a reliable way to exclude defragmentation transactions from appearing as regular transactions.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

[RTH](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/4) introduced a standard method of utilizing [encrypted memos](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/3) for recording transaction history between two users. Not all transactions on the MobileCoin blockchain are between two different users or accounts, however. Defragmenation transactions are transactions that a user sends to themselves in order to consolidate small `TxOut`s into larger ones. This is necessary if a user needs to send a large transaction, and has enough balance, but cannot satisfy the `Amount` using their 16 largest `TxOut`s.

From the client's perspective, these larger `TxOut`s created by defragmentation appear as `TxOut`s received through normal transactions. This would be confusing to users if displayed this way in an application. Currently, the only way to differentiate defragmentation transactions from regular ones is to use [RTH](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/4) and check if the sender and recipient are both the user's account. This isn't immediately clear though, especially to new developers who have not been introduced to concepts like fragmentation or [RTH](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/4). Thus, a new memo type is proposed to mark defragmentation transactions.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

This proposal adds one new encrypted memo type, the Defragmentation Memo. The memo builder will write this memo to both `TxOut`s of defragmentation transactions. Both of the `TxOut`s generated by defragmentation transactions will be sent to the change subaddress. In other words, defragmentation transactions will produce two change outputs and no regular outputs. This allows for users to validate that they were the one who created the defragmentation memo. This memo has type bytes `0x0003`.

The Defragmentation Memo contains three pieces of data. Like RTH's Destination Memo, the fee and total outlay of the transaction are written to the memo. In addition to this, there is also a defragmentation ID number. If a highly fragmented account needs to send a large `Amount`, it may require more than one transaction to sufficiently defragment. The defragmentation ID number can be used by clients to group defragmentation transactions from one session together. This might be desirable in order to show how much was paid in fees for defragmentation. If used, the defragmentation ID number should be selected randomly.

Of the two change outputs, the regular output will have the non-zero defragmentation `Amount`. The other output will always have a 0 `Amount`, as defragmentation transactions never produce change. Both `TxOut`s will have a defragmentation memo with the same ID. However, the 0 `Amount` `TxOut` will have a fee and outlay of 0. This will allow developers to add up the fees and outlays on all defragmentation memos and get the correct values.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## 0x0003 Defragmentation Memo

The 64-byte memo data is laid out as follows:

| Byte range | Item |
| ---------- | ---- |
| 0 - 7      | Big-endian bytes of fee `Amount` value, an unsigned 56-bit number |
| 7 - 15     | Big-endian bytes of the total outlay `Amount` value, an unsigned 64-bit integer |
| 15 - 23    | Big-endian bytes of the defragmentation ID, an unsigned 64-bit integer |
| 23 - 64    | Unused bytes |

The fee `Amount` value is stored as a u56 in the first 7 bytes. This is done for consistency with RTH Destination memos. The next 8 bytes contain the total outlay of the defragmentation transaction. Lastly, the defragmentation ID is stored in 8 bytes as a u64.

This memo will be written to both `TxOut`s of a defragmentation transaction. One output will have the non-zero defragmentation `Amount`. The other output will have the change `Amount`, which is always 0 for defragmentation transactions. The non-zero `Amount` output will get a memo with the fee and outlay for that transaction. The 0 `Amount` output will get a memo with a fee and outlay of 0, but the same ID as the non-zero output. Both of the `TxOut`s are sent to the user's change subaddress. The memos can be validated by checking that the subaddress the `TxOut`s were sent to is the change subaddress.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Accounts which have already performed defragmentation will either have no memos or sender/destination memos for their old defragmentation transactions. Though using an account with more than one application should be discouraged, not all developers will implement protections against it nor will all users heed this advice. If new applications do not handle legacy defragmentation transactions, they may inadvertently display them as normal transactions.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

Since defragmentation transactions never have change, they could only produce a single output. A second output is not necessary for RTH because the sender and recipient of defragmentation transactions are the same. This proposal does not remove the change `TxOut` from defragmentation transactions as it would make defragmentation transactions easier to identify. Keeping two outputs per transaction makes all transactions appear the same.

Since it is proposed that defragmentation transactions will produce two outputs, the fee and outlay fields of the change output memo are set to 0. Rather than simply writing the same exact data to both memos, the change output is given 0 fee and outlay so that clients can add up the fees and outlays of defragmentation `TxOut`s with the same ID. If the same memo data was written to both outputs, fees and outlays would be double if added up. To produce the correct data, clients would need to check the `Amount` on each `TxOut` and choose to ignore the defragmentation memos on `TxOut`s` with a value of 0. This raises the knowledge barrier needed for developers to utilize the defragmentation memos. Setting the change output memo fees and outlays to 0 allows them to be added to the regular outputs as it is an identity operation. Whether or not clients manually ignore change outputs, the math will have the same result.

One alternative to defragmentation memos would be to continue using RTH for identifying defragmentation transactions. But this approach has a higher barrier of entry for client developers in terms of MobileCoin knowledge. It is much simpler to just check the memo type; and when it comes to sharing example code, defragmentation memos are much easier to demonstrate.

Including a defragmentation ID may also not be necessary. Conversely, it may be better to use a larger value. A single u64 was chosen for simplicity and should be enough for one account. If clients do not need the ID field, they can also choose to ignore it.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

None
